Add upgrade documentation for XOSTOR (#319)
xcp-ng/xcp-ng-org: docs/xostor/xostor.md

See this documentation: [RPU](/management/updates/#rolling-pool-update-rpu).

## Upgrade

If you are reading this documentation, we assume that you want to upgrade a pool on which XOSTOR is deployed, i.e. change the version of XCP-ng, for example from 8.2 to 8.3.
For updates that don't change the version numbers (bugfixes, security fixes), see [the update section](#update).

### 1. Prerequisites

- All hosts must be up to date on the version of XCP-ng you are currently using. For this refer to [the update section](#update).

> - HA must be disabled on your pool.

Reviewer: What kind of sanity checks on the LINSTOR cluster should be done before starting the upgrade process?

Author: I just added a new line about that.

    currently-attached ( RO): true

uuid ( RO)                  : 1d872d5b-fb60-dbd7-58fc-555a211f18fa
             host-uuid ( RO): ef942670-e37d-49e6-81d0-d2a484b0cd10
               sr-uuid ( RO): d5f990f6-abca-0ebf-8582-b7e55901fb50
         device-config (MRO): group-name: linstor_group/thin_device; redundancy: 2; provisioning: thin
    currently-attached ( RO): true
```

### 3. Upgrade

From this point we can proceed to upgrade your XOSTOR-enabled pool.

An upgrade can take quite a long time so we recommend disabling the auto-evict mechanism during this procedure to avoid bad behavior.
On the host where the controller is running:
```
linstor controller set-property DrbdOptions/AutoEvictAllowEviction False
```

For each host of the pool (starting with the master), we break down the different steps as follows:

1. Update the host following the instructions in [this guide](../installation/upgrade/#-upgrade-via-installation-iso-recommended), but do not proceed to the next host yet.

2. After rebooting the host, you will need to run specific commands to have a working LINSTOR node.

Install the LINSTOR RPMs:
```
yum install -y xcp-ng-release-linstor

> yum install -y xcp-ng-linstor

Reviewer: at first sight, not much:
```
[10:39 xcpng83-bzkcpvhy ~]# yum install xcp-ng-release-linstor
...
Total download size: 3.9 k
Installed size: 477  
Is this ok [y/d/N]: y
Downloading packages:
xcp-ng-release-linstor-1.4-2.xcpng8.3.noarch.rpm                                                                                                                                            | 3.9 kB  00:00:00     
Running transaction check
Running transaction test
Transaction test succeeded
Running transaction
  Installing : xcp-ng-release-linstor-1.4-2.xcpng8.3.noarch                                                                                                                                                    1/1 
  Verifying  : xcp-ng-release-linstor-1.4-2.xcpng8.3.noarch                                                                                                                                                    1/1 

Installed:
  xcp-ng-release-linstor.noarch 0:1.4-2.xcpng8.3                                                                                                                                                                   

Complete!
```

               sr-uuid ( RO): d5f990f6-abca-0ebf-8582-b7e55901fb50
         device-config (MRO): group-name: linstor_group/thin_device; redundancy: 2; provisioning: thin
    currently-attached ( RO): true
```

### 3. Upgrade

From this point we can proceed to upgrade your XOSTOR pool.

An upgrade can take quite a long time so we recommend disabling the auto-evict mechanism during this procedure to avoid bad behavior.
On the host where the controller is running:
```
linstor controller set-property DrbdOptions/AutoEvictAllowEviction False
```

For each host of the pool (starting with the master), we break down the different steps as follows:

1. Update the host following the instructions in [this guide](../installation/upgrade/#-upgrade-via-installation-iso-recommended).

2. After rebooting the host, you will need to run specific commands to have a working LINSTOR node.

Install the LINSTOR RPMs:
```
yum install -y xcp-ng-release-linstor
yum install -y xcp-ng-linstor
```

Restart the toolstack to detect the LINSTOR driver:
```
xe-toolstack-restart
```

Then finally open the ports and enable the LINSTOR services using the `<GROUP_NAME>` and `<HOST_UUID>` obtained above:
```

> xe host-call-plugin host-uuid=<HOST_UUID> plugin=linstor-manager fn=addHost args:groupName=<GROUP_NAME>

Author: I would say that waiting for the previous command to return is enough to use the plugins API.

> xe host-call-plugin host-uuid=<HOST_UUID> plugin=linstor-manager fn=addHost args:groupName=<GROUP_NAME>

Reviewer: Isn't that the job of `xapi-wait-init-complete`?

> xe host-call-plugin host-uuid=<HOST_UUID> plugin=linstor-manager fn=addHost args:groupName=<GROUP_NAME>

Author: I don't see a problem with that. In this case, we can wait for XAPI to start, and then calling the plugin is enough.
We just need to be sure to have installed in 8.3 the same RPMs of LINSTOR controller/satellite as the hosts in 8.2.

```

Find where the controller is running on your pool and check the status of the nodes:
```
linstor n list
```

The node can be marked `OFFLINE` or `EVICTED` (if the auto-evict mechanism is still active):
```
╭───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
┊ Node   ┊ NodeType ┊ Addresses              ┊ State                                        ┊
╞═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╡
┊ node01 ┊ COMBINED ┊ 10.1.0.60:3366 (PLAIN) ┊ EVICTED                                      ┊
┊ node02 ┊ COMBINED ┊ 10.1.0.61:3366 (PLAIN) ┊ Online                                       ┊
┊ node03 ┊ COMBINED ┊ 10.1.0.62:3366 (PLAIN) ┊ Online                                       ┊
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
```

In this situation, you can restore the node:
```
linstor node restore node01
```

Wait a little while and check if there is an issue with the resources:
```
linstor r list
linstor advise r # Give possible fix commands in case of problems.
```

> Finally check in XOA that the PBD of the SR of this host is connected. If not, do so.

Author: You can't plug the PBD without the LINSTOR packages (before this point it was not the case), so I guess most of the time you have to manually connect the PBD unless the XAPI tries again on its own, which to my knowledge is not the case.

> Finally check in XOA that the PBD of the SR of this host is connected. If not, do so.

Reviewer: So this won't be necessary if the installer takes care of the packages before we reboot, right?
What will be left then?

> Finally check in XOA that the PBD of the SR of this host is connected. If not, do so.

Author: You must be sure to execute addHost before the initial PBD plug. Otherwise, the master will not be able to plug in properly (as a reminder, each SR during the master PBD attach calls  runs a scan).

See this documentation: [RPU](/management/updates/#rolling-pool-update-rpu).

## Upgrade

If you are reading this documentation, we assume that you want to upgrade a pool on which XOSTOR is deployed, i.e. change the version of XCP-ng, for example from 8.2 to 8.3.

> For updates that don't change the version numbers (bugfixes, security fixes), see [the update section](#update).

Reviewer: "updates that don't change the version numbers" is a strange concept, this might need rewording

### 1. Prerequisites

- All hosts must be up to date on the version of XCP-ng you are currently using. For this refer to [the update section](#update).
- HA must be disabled on your pool.
- Ensure all nodes are reachable and resources are in "OK" state via XO's XOSTOR view. Alternatively, you can use the CLI:
```
linstor n list
linstor r list
linstor adv r
```

> ### 2. Information to retrieve before upgrading

Reviewer: Do we want to keep this section once we have an ISO that makes the process simpler?

See this documentation: [RPU](/management/updates/#rolling-pool-update-rpu).

## Upgrade

If you are reading this documentation, we assume that you want to upgrade a pool on which XOSTOR is deployed, i.e. change the version of XCP-ng, for example from 8.2 to 8.3.
For updates that don't change the version number of XCP-ng (bugfixes, security fixes), see [the update section](#update).

### 1. Prerequisites

- All hosts must be up to date on the version of XCP-ng you are currently using. For this refer to [the update section](#update).
- HA must be disabled on your pool.
- Ensure all nodes are reachable and resources are in "OK" state via XO's XOSTOR view. Alternatively, you can use the CLI:
```
linstor n l
linstor r l
linstor adv r

> linstor sp l

Reviewer 2: Maybe not give the small command version? They can be prone to errors

Reviewer 3: I agree. I think we should provide the full commands in the docs in general. That also better documents what the commands do, as the names have a meaning that is easier to understand than single letters.

Author: Don't see a problem here. Generally a simple copy-paste is executed by users.

```

### 2. Upgrade steps

From this point we can proceed to upgrade your XOSTOR-enabled pool.

An upgrade can take quite a long time so we recommend disabling the auto-evict mechanism during this procedure to avoid bad behavior.

> On the host where the controller is running:

Reviewer 2: Can we explain how to find the controller? Do we already have a part to explain this? Maybe show `--controllers=` here.

```
linstor controller set-property DrbdOptions/AutoEvictAllowEviction False
```

> For each host of the pool (starting with the master), follow the instructions given in [this guide](../installation/upgrade/#-upgrade-via-installation-iso-recommended). Just one important thing: don't try to upgrade using CLI or network ISO installer. Always use the latest full ISO that can be found [here](https://xcp-ng.org/download/).

Reviewer 3: Here, must make it cleare that they must use the upgrade ISO that has `linstor-upgradeonly` in its name.

I think actually this deserves a dedicated section, next to the prerequisites, explaining:

1. That they must use a dedicated ISO image
2. Why that is so (need to preserve linstor package versions to allow rolling update without storage issues, due to constraints posed by linstor itself)
3. How it's named (contains `linstor-upgradeonly) and where to download it from

:::warning

> If you have this error during upgrade, you must download the latest full ISO version as documented above:

Reviewer 3: And here too.

```
Cannot upgrade host with LINSTOR using a package source that does not have LINSTOR.  Please use as package source the repository on the dedicated ISO.
```
:::

If you want to make sure that everything is going well so as not to impact your production, we recommend these manual checks after each host reboot:

- Check if there is an issue with the resources:
```
linstor r list
linstor advise r # Give possible fix commands in case of problems.
```

> - Check in XOA that the PBD of the SR of this host is connected. If not, do so.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Check in XOA that the PBD of the SR of this host is connected. If not, connect it.
```

Why could it be disconnected?

> - Check in XOA that the PBD of the SR of this host is connected. If not, do so.

Reviewer 2: Might add to check `linstor node list` to see if the node is correctly connected after coming back up?

Reviewer 2: Or is the PBD being connected enough?

:::warning

> Very important, if you don't want to break the quorum or your production environment. You must execute the commands given above after upgrading a host and do not reboot/upgrade the others until the host's satellite is operational and its PBD is plugged.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Very important: if you don't want to break the quorum or your production environment, you must execute the commands given above after upgrading a host and not reboot/upgrade the others until the host's satellite is operational and its PBD is plugged.
```

See this documentation: [RPU](/management/updates/#rolling-pool-update-rpu).

## Upgrade

If you are reading this documentation, we assume that you want to upgrade a pool on which XOSTOR is deployed, i.e. change the version of XCP-ng, for example from 8.2 to 8.3.
For updates that don't change the version number of XCP-ng (bugfixes, security fixes), see [the update section](#update).

### 1. Prerequisites

- All hosts must be up to date on the version of XCP-ng you are currently using. For this refer to [the update section](#update).
- HA must be disabled on your pool.
- Ensure all nodes are reachable and resources are in "OK" state via XO's XOSTOR view. Alternatively, you can use the CLI:
```
linstor n l
linstor r l
linstor adv r
linstor sp l
```

> ### 2. Download XCP-ng ISO with LINSTOR support

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### 2. XCP-ng ISO with LINSTOR support
```

(I also thought of "Download the latest XCP-ng ISO with LINSTOR support" but that's a bit long)

- If you create a volume of 200 GiB it means that 400 of the 600 GiB are physically used. However, the remaining disk of 200 GiB cannot be used because it cannot be replicated on two different disks.
- If you create 3 volumes of 100 GiB: the SR is filled. In this case, you have 300 GiB of unique data and a replication of 300 GiB.

> ### How to add a new host or fix a bad configured host?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### How to add a new host or fix a badly configured host?
```

:::warning
For a new host, make sure you have the required packages by running these commands on it:
```
yum install -y xcp-ng-release-linstor

> yum install -y xcp-ng-linstor

Reviewer 3: This could bring them versions that are newer than the installed versions; So first they need to make sure their pool is up to date. But in some cases they need the new host before they can update the rest (for example so that they have enough hosts for all VMs during RPU), so we need to provide instructions for that. There's a KB in the general, non-linstor case, we should work together on a doc update (or give thomas all the data and let him write it), covering both the standard case and the linstor case.

Something in another section of the docs named for example "Prepare a new host for joining an existing pool"

Reviewer 3: Until then, you could say here that the pool must be up to date, and if it isn't and they aren't in a situation where they can safely update it, they should first contact support.

```

And then restart the toolstack to detect the LINSTOR driver:
```
xe-toolstack-restart
```
:::

> First ensure you have the same configuration on each PBD of your XOSTOR SR using this command. Replace `<UUID>` with the correct one:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First ensure you have the same configuration on each PBD of your XOSTOR SR using this command. Replace `<UUID>` with the SR UUID:
```

               sr-uuid ( RO): d5f990f6-abca-0ebf-8582-b7e55901fb50
         device-config (MRO): group-name: linstor_group/thin_device; redundancy: 2; provisioning: thin
    currently-attached ( RO): true

uuid ( RO)                  : 06b5e263-8ec1-74e9-3162-d39785be6ba7
             host-uuid ( RO): f7737f79-ad49-491c-a303-95ac37fb6a13
               sr-uuid ( RO): d5f990f6-abca-0ebf-8582-b7e55901fb50
         device-config (MRO): group-name: linstor_group/thin_device; redundancy: 2; provisioning: thin
    currently-attached ( RO): true

uuid ( RO)                  : 1d872d5b-fb60-dbd7-58fc-555a211f18fa
             host-uuid ( RO): ef942670-e37d-49e6-81d0-d2a484b0cd10
               sr-uuid ( RO): d5f990f6-abca-0ebf-8582-b7e55901fb50
         device-config (MRO): group-name: linstor_group/thin_device; redundancy: 2; provisioning: thin
    currently-attached ( RO): true
```

Then if you want to fix an incorrect group name value or even add a new host, use this command with the correct `<GROUP_NAME>` and `<HOST_UUID>`:
```
xe host-call-plugin host-uuid=<HOST_UUID> plugin=linstor-manager fn=addHost args:groupName=<GROUP_NAME>
```

> For a short description, this command (re)create a PBD, open DRBD/LINSTOR ports, start specific services and add the node in the LINSTOR database.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For a short description, this command (re)creates a PBD, opens DRBD/LINSTOR ports, starts specific services and adds the node to the LINSTOR database.
```

> A storage layer is not directly added to this node. You can verify the storage state like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have storage on the host, a storage layer is not directly added to this node. You can verify the storage state like this:
```

┊ DfltDisklessStorPool             ┊ hpmc15 ┊ DISKLESS ┊                           ┊              ┊               ┊ False        ┊ Ok    ┊ hpmc15;DfltDisklessStorPool             ┊
┊ DfltDisklessStorPool             ┊ hpmc16 ┊ DISKLESS ┊                           ┊              ┊               ┊ False        ┊ Ok    ┊ hpmc16;DfltDisklessStorPool             ┊
┊ DfltDisklessStorPool             ┊ hpmc17 ┊ DISKLESS ┊                           ┊              ┊               ┊ False        ┊ Ok    ┊ hpmc17;DfltDisklessStorPool             ┊
┊ xcp-sr-linstor_group_thin_device ┊ hpmc15 ┊ LVM_THIN ┊ linstor_group/thin_device ┊   476.66 GiB ┊    476.70 GiB ┊ True         ┊ Ok    ┊ hpmc15;xcp-sr-linstor_group_thin_device ┊
┊ xcp-sr-linstor_group_thin_device ┊ hpmc16 ┊ LVM_THIN ┊ linstor_group/thin_device ┊   476.66 GiB ┊    476.70 GiB ┊ True         ┊ Ok    ┊ hpmc16;xcp-sr-linstor_group_thin_device ┊
╰──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
```

> If VG/LV is missing on `hpmc17`, connect to this machine and use `vgcreate` with the wanted disks to create `linstor_group`. For `thick` configuration it's enough, for `thin` additional commands are required. Replace `linstor_group/thin_device` by your pool name if it's different in your configuration.

Reviewer 2: It's a bit unclear what to do in what situation here.

> If VG/LV is missing on `hpmc17`, connect to this machine and use `vgcreate` with the wanted disks to create `linstor_group`. For `thick` configuration it's enough, for `thin` additional commands are required. Replace `linstor_group/thin_device` by your pool name if it's different in your configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your host has disks that need to be added to the linstor SR, you will need to create VG/LV.
Use `vgcreate` with the wanted disks to create `linstor_group` on the host.
For `thin` additional commands are required, replace `linstor_group/thin_device` by your pool name if it's different in your configuration.
```

Author: I used part of your suggestion, feel free to reread and tell me what you think.

- If you create a volume of 200 GiB it means that 400 of the 600 GiB are physically used. However, the remaining disk of 200 GiB cannot be used because it cannot be replicated on two different disks.
- If you create 3 volumes of 100 GiB: the SR is filled. In this case, you have 300 GiB of unique data and a replication of 300 GiB.

### How to add a new host or fix a badly configured host?

:::warning
If you want to configure a new host, make sure the pool is up-to-date (see [the update section](#update)) and make sure you have the required packages on the new host by running these commands on it:
```
yum install -y xcp-ng-release-linstor
yum install -y xcp-ng-linstor
```

And then restart the toolstack to detect the LINSTOR driver:
```
xe-toolstack-restart
```

> If you are in a rare situation where you can't safely update your pool, contact the [Vates Pro Support](https://vates.tech/pricing-and-support).

Author: I pushed with your suggestion but kept the original label `Vates Pro Support` label.
